``ff_assess``
*************

Background
==========

``ff_assess`` is the model assessment subprogram of Fast-Forward. Once you have generated a
model using ``ff_inter``, and performed a test simulation using your new coarse grained model,
``ff_assess`` can be used to validate how faithful your model is to the pseudo-atomistic
reference is was generated from. In short, ``ff_assess`` is designed to compare the reference
distributions used to generate the new coarse grained topology to what was actually simulated.

Options
=======

.. code-block:: none

    -f TRAJFILE           simulated trajectory file (default: None)
    -s TPRFILE            simulated tpr file (default: None)
    -i [ITP_FILES ...]    itp file (default: None)
    -d REFERENCE          Path to directory with reference distributions (default: None)
    -plots [PLOTS]        Make plots comparing distributions. Optionally provide a path (default: current dir) (default:
                      None)
    -outliers             exclude outliers from overall score (default: False)
    -plot-data            save data for making plots as single pickle file (default: False)
    -score-weight HELLINGER_WEIGHT
                      weight of the Hellinger distance in the distance score (default: 0.7)
    -include-constraints  fully include constrained distances in the distance score score calculation (default: False)
    -dists                Save text files with time series and distribution data for interactions (default: False)


Example
=======

The simulated trajectory of a new model of a molecule could be assessed like so:

.. code-block::

    ff_assess -f vis.xtc -s vis.tpr -i molecule.itp -d /path/to/reference/files/ -plots

.. note::

    For a single molecule, it is usually sensible to extract the trajectory of only the molecule beforehand,
    and correct it for pbc artifacts using Gromacs. For example:

    .. code-block:: none

        gmx trjconv -f trajectory.xtc -s topology.tpr -pbc mol -center -o vis.xtc
        gmx trjconv -f trajectory.xtc -s topology.tpr -pbc mol -center -o vis.gro -e 0

    The ``vis.gro`` can also be used to generate the topology of the solvent-free system using ``gmx grompp`` and
    an appropriate topology file


In the ``ff_assess`` command given above, the topology and trajectory are now a "real" simulated trajectory of
some molecule in the process of being parameterised.

In addition to the new topology and trajectory, ``ff_assess`` also requires the model itp used, and the files
generated by ``ff_inter`` containing the distribution information, indicated by ``-i`` and ``-d`` respectively.
The interactions annotated in the itp will be assessed against their reference distributions, and a warning
is issued if the relevant files cannot be found.

What is the subprogram actually doing?
=============================================

``ff_assess`` works in three steps:

    1.  Find interactions annotated in the input itp file
    2.  Generate distributions of the annotated interaction as were actually simulated in the input trajectory
    3.  Perform statistical tests comparing the simulated and reference distributions. Plot comparisons and
        generate reports.

Principally, ``ff_assess`` is calculating a score using the `Hellinger distance <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hellinger_distance>`_
between the two distributions. For two discrete probability distributions, `P` and `Q`, the distance is defined by:

.. math::
     H(P,Q) = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}\sqrt{\sum_{i=1}^k (\sqrt{p_i} - \sqrt{q_i} )^2}

`H(P,Q)` is then a score in the interval [0,1], with 0 indicating a perfect match and 1 indicating no overlap between
the two distributions. Fast forward also calculates a modified value using an additional term
to ensure agreement in the mean, as well as overall similarity between distributions. The extent of this contribution
is controlled by the ``score-weight`` flag in ``ff_assess``. By default, the native Hellinger distance is weighted
70% with a 30% contribution from the correction.


